[THEME MUSIC]
>>REGINA MEREDITH: When was
the last time you simply
sat and listened to music, eyes
closed, the rest of the world
shut out?
Today, music is more
used as background
to a busy, even frantic life,
often adding even more noise.
Gary Malkin is with us today
to speak about the richness
and depth our lives take
on when we give sound
our full attention.
In fact, even when we don't
give it our full attention,
because you create
ambient music just
like background noise
in cafes yourself.
So Gary, let's start with--
almost your entire life,
you've been a musician,
but at what point
did you start realizing
that music could be used
to aid in healing and alter
states of consciousness
and-- how did that all
come about for you?
>>GARY MALKIN: There
are many incidents
all throughout my
life, but the one
that I remember that's the
earliest was when I-- you know,
I started playing
the piano just by ear
when I was five years old,
and apparently I could
play anything I could hear.
I just sat down.
And I remember that when
there were-- you know,
I grew up in a typically
dysfunctional Jewish family
where everybody was, you
know, like Woody Allen movies,
constantly interrupting
each other.
And I remembered
that when I was--
it was just too much for me,
because I was a sensitive kid,
I'd go to the piano and
create a sanctuary for myself,
and I'd self-soothe.
On some level of
my being, I don't
know if I was aware of
it, but on some level
I recognized that everything in
the house started chilling out.
And it was like a
Pavlovian experience, where
I'd start to play
for my own well-being
and then all the fights
started to subside
and people started
getting more centered.
And I think on
some level I sensed
that there was a connection
between the music
and the environment in the home.
And I think that's when I
started getting hooked to it,
you know?
>>REGINA: That's
interesting, yeah.
And I wonder how many
people-- I did the same.
I'd come home from
school, drop the books,
and start playing the piano,
and just play and play
until I was calm.
>>MALKIN: I think it
saved my life, honestly,
because I had this
experience where
the experience of
presence wasn't very
common in this very
dysfunctional-- and loving,
but very busy family.
So the idea of
having a place that
was completely
whole and complete,
and have a place to just
resonate in the beauty of music
was just a life-saving
experience.
>>REGINA: Well and
as you said, you
helped heal the background noise
of your life in that household,
too.
Did anyone ever comment on
it when you were growing up?
Did they like you to play, or
did they find your practice
annoying or-- how did the rest
of the people in your family
experience your music?
>>MALKIN: I didn't grow
up in a musical family.
And my mother, she was in the
kitchen cooking, and she said,
Gary, play "Happy
Talk"-- you know,
a typical Jewish
Brooklyn mother--
and there was one song she
loved from "South Pacific,"
and I just thought, oh my god.
So I knew how to get her really
happy by just playing this one
song.
You know, but there was
something, just in response
to your question, that
was-- fast forward
to when I was just beginning
my film scoring career,
and I was watching the audience
on the opening night of a New
York film festival.
It was the first
documentary I did
that was about promoting
anti-nuclear-- an understanding
of how nuclear
energy was affecting
our lives in peacetime, and
how it was causing cancer
from the downwind and all that.
And I was in the
back of the audience,
and there was this
part of the film where
it was so filled with despair.
And people were not
breathing, and you could just
feel the place thick with
this energy of just like, ugh.
And then this theme
that I came up
with that was meant
to communicate hope,
suddenly this oboe line came
in and I literally almost saw
the air lift.
I heard people
breathing more deeply.
I was about 28 years old.
And that was the moment to
me, as beginning my career,
that I went, oh my god, this
is so much more than just
entertainment or show business.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
It drives the emotions.
I mean, I think that's what
isn't particularly well
understood a lot of times
in production in general,
is how important the music is.
And I used to produce
documentaries and lots
of other shows, and for
me it was always backward.
Usually, the musical
score is added last.
And to me, I had to hear
the sound of the music that
was going to accompany
the story before I ever
saw the real story
or even the imagery--
>>MALKIN: Yeah.
>>REGINA: --because people
live in their emotions
when they're watching
these, and the music is
what drives the emotions.
>>MALKIN: Totally.
Well, and music is the universal
language of the heart, right?
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>MALKIN: So if
you-- that says a lot
about your emotional
intelligence,
because if you don't have a
bottom-line grounder of what
it is emotionally
that you're feeling,
everything else is all just
noise and separate parts.
>>REGINA: Well and
in a story, you
want to know the emotional
message that's being delivered.
>>MALKIN: That's
the bottom line.
>>REGINA: You have
to be clear on it.
>>MALKIN: Right.
>>REGINA: And music is
what takes people to it.
>>MALKIN: It's
amazing, isn't it?
>>REGINA: It really is.
So amidst all of this, you
ultimately saw yourself--
and as you explain
yourself to be,
it's a different kind of-- a
music and health innovator.
Not a sound healer,
which I was kind
of erroneously calling you.
Tell us what that means.
>>MALKIN: Well you know, we're
experiencing a renaissance
of quantification, you
know, proof everywhere
around the power of
music and sound healing.
And right now, there's
a great leveling
in the great tent
of sound and music,
because with neurological
studies and all this stuff,
we're actually seeing what
happens to our bodies,
our minds, our
biological systems, when
we expose ourselves to
that kind of listening
and those kinds of sounds.
So I back-doored into
this through the power
of film music.
You know, I was-- I wanted
to be John Williams.
You know, I wanted to
be a film composer.
So my way into understanding
how human beings are affected
by music came through 25 years
of scoring television and film
and commercials.
And I had a television show
called "Unsolved Mysteries"
that I scored for
15 years, which
was enough to drive me
crazy, but it was wonderful.
It was a great team.
And--
>>REGINA: Well, and that's
a very specific genre,
creating very specific
emotional responses.
>>MALKIN: Well yeah,
it was happy and sad
and everything in between.
But when I started to really
explore the idea of-- well,
it was really out of
my own need for healing
when a major loss
in my life happened.
I actually was drawn
to that, like how can I
create the soundtrack
for my life
at this point when loss has
hit me in a debilitating way.
And that's when I
was drawn to create
this product with
Michael Stillwater called
"Graceful Passages."
And what it was was
taking spoken messages
around loss and
around transitions
and scoring it in
a way that enables
us to hear when we're so wigged
out by loss that we actually
can't even hear words anymore
without that score that you
were talking about, right--
>>REGINA: Mm-hm.
>>MALKIN: --working
on documentaries.
So I came through this process
as a film composer looking
at how profound it is to receive
wisdom with film score music,
and how biologically,
physiologically, spiritually,
emotionally things
change in our ability
to be present in the
moment, to be engaged
with our relationships, to
meet our transitions with more
consciousness, you know?
So over the launch of this thing
called "Graceful Passages,"
which was about 15
years ago, I started
to explore, well,
my god, if music
can be the digestive enzyme
that allows us to process
the main course of life--
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>MALKIN: --if it
can actually enable
us to assimilate
the meaning when
we're lost in new
transitions-- birth, death,
and everything in between--
you know, as they say,
you know, what is it--
pain is inevitable,
but suffering is
optional, right?
>>REGINA: Mm-hm.
>>MALKIN: If there's a way
to alleviate the suffering
by assimilating it with
music, by understanding it
with your heart before
you even-- your mind does,
what else can it do?
So that's when I started
to look at the greatest
challenges in our life.
How we prepare for birth?
How we go through birth?
You know, the pregnancy
issues, the bonding issues.
How do we deal with
burnout with caregivers?
How do we face the
3:00 AM moments
when you're waiting for a
diagnosis with a cancer--
when you're worried
about cancer?
How do you deal
with the end of life
when somebody is giving
you a terminal diagnosis?
These are these
bottleneck moments
that you notice in films
have very particular film
scores to make you feel
very particular things.
>>REGINA: Mm-hm.
>>MALKIN: Well, what if
life is so complicated
now that we need a
private film score
to help us assimilate
emotionally
what's really going on?
And I believe that's how
things have gotten today.
And we can talk more about that.
>>REGINA: I think that's a
really beautiful way to put it.
And I notice the
same thing, where,
if there's a large
shift in life,
it's almost like I'm not fully
comfortable finishing whatever
that is until I find the
right piece of music.
And then that piece
will always forever
be linked to that time in life,
and that particular transition,
as you call it.
But it's really important
to find the music.
>>MALKIN: No, it's true.
And you know, it's interesting.
The most common
association people
have-- I love that you
said that-- is nostalgia
associations, you know.
So like, we know that
song that was playing
when we had our
first kiss, you know,
or those moments in
high school or whatever.
And that's very important.
And you know, when someone's
dying, when you ask them,
you know, what is the music
that you remember, many people,
like, gravitate to
those pieces of music
that bring back their
life review, you know?
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>MALKIN: But there's
also a new understanding
that this health innovation,
music and health innovator
title that I've
recently adopted,
leads us to, which is, you
know, we've always-- we've
been in the age of information.
And therefore, IQ was the
most important, remember,
in the 40s and 50s.
Then, we started integrating
holistic-- integration
of holistic medicine.
And over the last 30
years, finally we're there.
And we're no longer in
the age of information,
we're in the age of integration.
But now, coming in, that I
believe is the next big wave,
is the age of
vibrational intelligence.
Instead of EQ,
emotional intelligence--
which is from holistic
integrative health-- I'd
say VQ, for vibrational
intelligence,
becomes how sensitive
are we to the resonance
in the room, in our hearts,
in this engage between one
another.
And music is the life
blood of vibration.
It's resonance.
>>REGINA: The medium.
>>MALKIN: It's frequency.
It's like the unified field.
We can't hear all
the vibrations,
like the light spectrum,
but they're there.
So what if we can develop
VQ, vibrational intelligence,
in a way that uplifts our
game, makes us more empathic--
>>REGINA: Let's talk about that.
>>MALKIN: --connects us.
>>REGINA: Let's talk about--
and on an ambient level
alone, because you've worked
with music for environments.
So when you're-- do you have
to have a very specific kind
of request, or maybe mandate,
for environmental music?
For example, if you're
in an office space
where you have to
have really clear
left brain attention,
what kind of music?
How do you go about
creating that?
Give us some ideas of some of
the notes and chords and such
that you would use for that.
>>MALKIN: Well, you're
bringing up my newest passion.
It's not something--
when I was 17,
I was a big fan of Erik Satie's.
You know, that [SINGING]
da-da-da-da-da-da-da.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>MALKIN: That
came and everybody
embraced it like Pachelbel's
Canon was everywhere, you know?
>>REGINA: Every--
and it's true there.
Let's talk about that in
a little bit, universally
beloved tunes.
>>MALKIN: Right.
>>REGINA: You know, pieces.
>>MALKIN: Yeah, I can think that
Mozart thing from that famous
movie, [SINGING]
da-da-da-da-da-- yeah,
these things have
vibrational resonance, right,
to a certain kind of energy.
I'm really passionate about
this subject right now.
And it's a new passion, because
ironically, when I was 17,
the Satie love, he
created this concept that
happened in the
Paris exhibition I
think in the late 1890s
called furniture music.
It's actually the
name of my private--
>>REGINA: Furniture music?
>>MALKIN: Furniture music.
And it's actually the name
of my publishing company.
And what it refers
to is, his belief
was music is like furniture.
It sets the tone of a room
and makes you feel differently
when it's in the
room, right, and when
it's strategically designed.
Well, this is way back
in-- many people consider
the godfather of the
impressionist music movement,
right, with Debussy and Ravel.
>>REGINA: Mm-hm.
>>MALKIN: So why--
how funny that now,
after a 30-year career, this
is where I'm most passionate.
And I'm working with a company
called Aesthetic Audio Systems.
>>REGINA: Talk about it.
>>MALKIN: Well, Don Campbell
was one of our heroes
from "The Sound and
Music Healing World."
And Don Campbell wrote the
book-- he's from this area,
in Colorado.
He wrote the book "The
Mozart--" "The Mozart Effect--"
>>REGINA: Mm-hm.
>>MALKIN: Right?
And he has done a lot of
understanding about how music
affects different environments.
And in fact, one of the
most advanced hospitals
in the world that utilizes his
theories is here in Colorado.
And he, through
Aesthetic Audio Systems,
developed a way of designing
music for the waiting room,
for the pre-op, for the post-op,
for pain resolution, for that
health care green
room, the health
care-- to recharge
and deal with burnout.
So he had these
zones, and he created
a hardware and a software
with his company that
addressed this nuance
of vibrational ambient
need for people to have
certain musical supports
for certain outcomes and certain
ideal ways of being, right?
And that's what Aesthetic
Audio Systems does.
And sadly, Don died
a few years ago.
And his partners
were looking who
can be the one that
could replace him.
And I am so humbled by being
the one that they chose.
So--
>>REGINA: That's wonderful.
>>MALKIN: We're
designing-- and I'm
excited about this--
we're designing new tuning
systems for music that
bring greater stillness,
and we're designing what I
call music for sacred space,
or music for mindfulness
in this thing
called "The Exhale Series."
And what I've found is there's
a lot of slow music out there
that chills you out, like that
music we just referred to,
that-- I forget-- "Madigan".
I forget that film.
>>REGINA: "Elvira Madigan".
>>MALKIN: "Elvira
Madigan", thank you.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
The score.
>>MALKIN: But there
isn't a lot of slow music
that creates space to invite
you to live and do and be
and engage and write
and-- most of it
is continuously
designed to be engrossed
in the musical experience.
But what we need
more of is music
that has more spaciousness.
>>REGINA: Furniture music.
>>MALKIN: Furniture music.
And so this sacred space
piano improvisation music
I've developed-- and other
types of music and instruments--
is designed to create
a musical idea,
and in it has the
rise and the fall,
the breath and the-- like
life and the death, the birth
and the death, right.
It has intrinsically in it
this initiation like the wave,
and this relax.
And then there's space.
And something happens
autonomically to us
when we are in a space where
there's that music that
not only relaxes
us, but it engages
a kind of mindful
alertness that allows
us to step into our environments
and do what we came here to do.
>>REGINA: Well, that's a very--
>>MALKIN: To be who
we came here to be.
>>REGINA: Yes.
And it creates a
natural kind of rhythm.
I've heard CDs,
meditative CDs, where
breath is used, for
example, which I always
have found that to be very
powerful because you're falling
into a resonance with
the rhythm, you know,
and toward whatever
end it's being used.
Obviously, if someone's
gasping for air,
that's a whole different deal,
but you know what I'm saying.
>>MALKIN: Of course.
>>REGINA: Just what you-- I
guess I'm just reflecting back
the value in what you
just said, is anything
that creates this cyclical
unconscious kind of patterning
for us.
>>MALKIN: Well, they call it--
>>REGINA: That you fall
into resonance with.
>>MALKIN: Yeah, exactly.
And they're calling it in the
music therapy world, which
is, you know, used
to be-- might still
be one of the fastest-growing
fields in medicine,
is entrainment.
>>REGINA: Entrainment, yes.
>>MALKIN: Right.
And so breath sends a signal
consciously and subconsciously
to entrain like the mirror
neurons that you know about
in our brain, it
actually creates
this remembering
that innately we're
healthiest when we're in this
state of 70 beats per minute,
right?
>>REGINA: Mm-hm.
>>MALKIN: Or the-- you
know, the true sound healers
that know this stuff for
real, because, like I said,
I back-doored into this--
there is a state that's
optimal for human physiology
and human consciousness
and human wellness.
>>REGINA: Yes, you know Peet's,
the coffee shop Peet's--
>>MALKIN: Of course.
It's my favorite coffee.
>>REGINA: There you go.
The man who founded Peet's was
ahead of the game on that one.
He understood that, if people
were going to be in his coffee
shop, he wanted to have
a certain coherence,
so he only allowed
classical music.
Well, he has since
passed away, but that
remained in the charter
that, into the future,
that Peet's shall only
play classical music.
>>MALKIN: I didn't know that.
That's so great.
>>REGINA: Yeah, yeah.
You notice it doesn't
matter where you go,
it's still classical
in all of the Peet's.
>>MALKIN: Wow.
Cool.
>>REGINA: And I have
to say, depending
on-- you know, if
I'm writing a script,
for example, if I need
to be in a certain space,
often I'll go to Peet's
because that frequency is
the one that's going to allow
for the most upliftment, rather
than the randomness of
Pandora's coffee house
mix somewhere, which could
be anything and, you know,
very disturbing
to your thoughts.
>>MALKIN: Well, your product
placement sponsorship
should be really
happy about this.
We should contact
Peet's right away.
>>REGINA: Yeah,
well, their espresso
is a little heavy
for me, but anyway.
OK.
So another thing
you're working on
is you're working with
a researcher at Antioch
University in New England.
And what is-- and it's called
Five Portal Collaborative,
the Five Portal Collaborative.
What's that mean?
>>MALKIN: Well,
technically, it's
a little bit premature,
because we're just
building this vision now.
>>REGINA: Well, can
you talk about it?
>>MALKIN: But I'm
really proud about it--
yeah-- because I feel like we
still don't have the tools yet
to measure what I believe
will be the new most
burgeoning part of
health and wellness,
that I think is an
essential part of cleaning
up and improving why--
how we age and die
is the role of arts in
the health care world.
Because when you deal
with arts, you're
dealing with the great healer--
the greatest healer, which
is nature, which is
beauty, which is color,
which is creativity, right.
And when you can strategize
those forces, which
are direct from God-- you
know, the best things in life
are free-- but when you can
strategize these resonant tools
to create certain
environments, you
create what I think
we're going to need today
to deal with the stresses
and the challenges
and the fears that
are actually coming up
that are as a result of being
so addicted to digital devices.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>MALKIN: My fear right
now is that this belief
that "I think, therefore
I am," that Descartes said
in the 1800s or
whenever, has become
a bit of an imbalance
and a sickness that has,
shall we say-- a sickness
might be too strong,
but that the imbalance
means that we're all so
word, verbal, mental,
linear-driven that--
but neurolinguistics
programming,
this form of communication, NLP,
says that our communication is
only 7% of our exchange.
So what about the
other 93, right?
So the Five Portal
Collaborative is about how do we
change the way we learn?
I mean, it can also
change the way we heal,
and which I'm working on
a lot with, as I said,
birth and death and
everything between.
But what if we change the
way we learned so that,
instead of a mind only-- I
mean, you know the great cliche
of academia is they're just
all minds and they're on these
white towers and blah, blah,
blah, and they're all--
>>REGINA: Disassociated from the
reality on the ground, usually.
>>MALKIN: Well, another way to
put it, though, in Five Portal
language-- I'm using
the term Five Portal,
and I haven't even
secured the term yet,
so I shouldn't have said
that-- but Five Portals refers
to the mindfulness explosion
that's happening in our culture
has happened because of the
scientific quantification
of what neuroscience is showing
what happens with a meditating
brain.
And we know now.
I mean, there's amazing research
with Richard Davidson and Dan
Siegel, and the marriage of
spirituality and biological
facts, right?
But what about that
part of us that
bypasses our heart and our soul
and our spirit and our bodies,
even in the
mindfulness practice?
I call it a spiritual bypass.
And there's a lot of people
who are still in mindfulness,
but what about a
wholehearted mindfulness that
has to do with mindfulness in
the intelligence of your body,
your centering, your gut brain?
What about mindfulness in the
intelligence of your soul?
As Thomas Moore says, the
intimate, sexual, story,
personal, your
friends, the things
you love, what about
mindfulness in your spirit?
Spirit intelligence is access
to things larger than you,
right, which is all
other intelligence,
all other vibration, right?
And what about access to all
those intelligence-- body,
mind, heart, spirit,
and soul, right?
Heart intelligence,
which, as you know maybe,
and I don't know if other people
know, HeartMath for 20 years
has developed this idea.
And you use the word coherence.
My feeling is, if
we're not working
with all the engines
working, and we're not
engaged in any one of
those five portals,
we're actually
depriving ourselves
of the ability to
really empathically,
compassionately, intelligently
communicate with one another.
And that means Putin
and Obama right down
to our own internal
experience, right.
So I-- that's what it's
is about, the learning
with all the engines working.
>>REGINA: Yes, and
that is very necessary.
And when I think
about it, it brings
to mind-- you were talking about
those type of holistic healing
of bringing all frequencies in.
And probably about--
almost 30 years ago,
I did a story in Germany
at the Wegman clinic, which
is a clinic based
on Rudolf Steiner's
anthroposophical medicine,
and it uses all frequencies.
I went into the
color chambers, and--
>>MALKIN: I love that.
>>REGINA: They use sound,
eurythmy, the dance,
they use nature.
All the rooms
look-- it's cancer.
Cancer-- it was primarily
then a cancer clinic.
I don't know what it
is now-- looking out--
every room looks out on
beautiful grassy and treed
areas.
The food is holistic
and tastes good.
They've been doing
that for years.
It's basics.
>>MALKIN: We've been living in
a culture that disparages that,
right?
>>REGINA: Yes.
Exactly.
>>MALKIN: Or has.
But now we're in a window.
There's an opening, right.
I just want to
say, the thing I'm
excited about around
Antioch University
is I didn't know that
their mission was,
you know, if you don't learn
for the purposes of making
the world a better
place-- you know,
they have five campuses
all over America,
and they said then you're
wasting-- you know,
then you should be ashamed.
And that's what it's for.
And their mission is
see, feel, and act.
So their intention is
to take how you learn
and actually have
it be something
that will leverage the place--
the world to be a better place.
>>REGINA: Well,
again-- and I mean,
I sound like a
broken record here.
Obviously, I'm a fan.
You know, another commercial.
The same thing with the
education system in the Waldorf
system-- and there are other
charter schools doing this
now-- where it is
all integrated.
You don't start with
the intellectual pursuit
until the other
parts have already
been integrated and developed.
>>MALKIN: My daughter was at
Waldorf school, so I totally--
>>REGINA: So you
totally get-- yeah.
So I mean, it's not like the
models aren't there to do this,
it just needs to
go mainstream now.
>>MALKIN: Well, it
needs to be integrated
in a non-fundamental way.
>>REGINA: Yes, it does.
>>MALKIN: And you know, one of
the things that Antioch does
is it's one of the few
graduate schools in New
England of anthroposophy
and of Waldorf teachers.
And not to promote--
here we're doing
Peet's and Waldorf's here.
But the point is,
more importantly,
to come back around to music--
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>MALKIN: What does music
have to do with this.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>MALKIN: John O'Donohue,
the famous mystic
who died a few years ago, the
Irish monk, talked about beauty
as the great healer.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
Beautiful work, by the way.
>>MALKIN: Oh, god.
>>REGINA: He was beautiful.
>>MALKIN: And music is the
universal language of emotion.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>MALKIN: Nature is the resource
for what people call biophilia,
the love of nature.
We are now understanding that
these things heal us, right,
and create the conditions in
which our immune system is
a lot happier and a
lot more successful.
>>REGINA: We just have
to give them a priority.
Let's talk a little--
if you don't mind--
>>MALKIN: No, no, thank you--
>>REGINA: --specifically,
because I kind of like
the sciencey nuts and
bolts of things, and--
>>MALKIN: Me, too.
>>REGINA: Let's talk about
how we experience music.
Let's talk about major
chords versus minor chords,
for example.
And then I want to
extend the conversation
into various cultures
of the world,
because maybe where major
chords might work well
for the American population
to inspire a certain mood, not
necessarily true in
the Asian countries.
>>MALKIN: True.
I swear, it's as if
you'd known me for years,
because for you to
say this is just
like giving candy to a baby.
When I was 17, I went to
Oberlin and I was a double major
in-- well, first I went to USC,
and then I went to Oberlin.
And I was a double
major in ethnomusicology
and composition.
And I was intuitively
drawn to how
the musics of different
cultures expanded my awareness.
What I now know is that, when
you actually subject yourself
to music that you're
not familiar with,
you can actually
expand your ability
to relate to other, to
the things that are not
familiar to you, in a way that's
transferable so that you're
more accepting and more
resilient to expose yourself
to things that are different
than you, which is something
we really need in
this culture today
based on all the fear
of differences, right.
>>REGINA: Xenophobia
is a word that's
popping up all over the planet.
>>MALKIN: Exactly, right?
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>MALKIN: So that level
is one of the basic levels
I love about exposing
yourself to different musics
of the world.
Brings you-- makes you embrace
the human range of experience,
right?
And through-- I call the
ethnic music of a culture
the hieroglyphic thumbprint
of a culture's soul, right.
But on the level that
you're talking about,
there are definite
emotions that are not
correlative in all the cultures.
I went to-- I'm a big lover
of the Balinese culture.
And I was in a
gamelan and all that,
which is a Balinese orchestra.
But be careful
what you wish for.
During my honeymoon,
my wife and I
got stuck for seven or eight
hours in one of these gamelan
competitions, and we wanted
to kill ourselves after that.
>>REGINA: Yeah, it maybe
wasn't your vibe, necessarily,
your frequency range.
>>MALKIN: Well, it was--
We were-- Yeah, yeah.
>>REGINA: But let's
talk about that.
What is it?
What is that happens?
I mean, if you can even
boil it down to something
as simple as major or
minor, or certain dominance
of certain type-- certain
chords in certain cultures.
I mean, when we often-- again,
if an American is listening,
we can use John Williams.
You brought him up
earlier as an example.
Everybody resonates pretty much
with John Williams's music,
which is why he's, what, the
most famous scorer of films
in America?
>>MALKIN: Well but
you know, I'm going
to say something about this.
One of the reasons I love
John Williams, and also
Thomas Newman and
Ennio Morricone,
these are the masters
of the film art.
>>REGINA: And then
there's Philip Glass.
>>MALKIN: That's another genre.
>>REGINA: A different deal.
A different genre.
>>MALKIN: I mean, he's
crossed over into movies.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>MALKIN: But one
of the reasons I
love these composers
is, metaphorically,
who these composers--
what they've
done since Max
Steiner in the '30s
is that they've been mapping
the musical emotional genome.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>MALKIN: Right?
In other words, what chords,
what genres, what timbres,
what rhythms, what
melodies, what textures
map to the emotional range
of the human experience.
>>REGINA: To drive
us toward that end.
>>MALKIN: Right.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>MALKIN: And they've mastered
it almost to the point
where they're almost
influencing other cultures.
So now it's almost
become universal,
because what is the
largest export of America?
>>REGINA: Yeah.
Entertainment.
>>MALKIN: The media
business, right?
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>MALKIN: The films
and everything,
black marketed
everywhere no matter even
if you're in Papua New Guinea.
>>REGINA: Oh, yeah, I've picked
them up for $1 in Chiang Mai.
>>MALKIN: Exactly, right?
>>REGINA: Laying down
in someone's truck.
>>MALKIN: Right.
So I think that there's
way much that we
don't understand about this.
But I do think that there's--
if you would talk about major
and minor, those are the primary
colors of the experience.
They're very obvious--
not to disparage
it-- the very obvious
primary colors
of the distinctions of music.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>MALKIN: And the modes and
the Greek modes in early
Pythagorean time of talking
about the powers and energetics
of each mode--
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>MALKIN: There were like,
you know, seven modes, right?
But in the Indian
raga system, there
are 5,000 ragas, which
is another form of mode,
if you will.
And every one of those
ragas was designed
to create a certain
effect in the human being.
But it also-- they
had-- I studied with Ali
Akbar Khan, Indian
classical music,
when I was-- took my leave
of absence from Oberlin.
So I've had a lot-- my passion
in my film composing career
has been about integrating
music from different cultures,
and authentically so.
Not giving lip service
to it, if you will.
>>REGINA: So let's get--
>>MALKIN: So those
distinctions, just to finish--
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>MALKIN: Those
distinctions are yet
to be fully understood
on why they work.
But I think they come down to
what the realm of intervals.
And many people who
don't know what music
is, the interval is the
actual vibrational frequency
between one note and another.
>>REGINA: Mm-hm.
>>MALKIN: And when Pythagoras
and Pythagorean tuning created
it through the music of the
spheres, through mathematics,
they noticed that it actually
occurs in nature, the pi ratio
Fibonacci sequence,
these are all Pythagorean
sacred geometric things.
Well, they correspond
to sounds, right?
And you can alter those
sounds in a way that
effects the human body,
mind, heart, spirit,
and soul in very unique
ways that we're just
beginning to understand.
>>REGINA: Yes, and--
>>MALKIN: It's a heady topic.
>>REGINA: It is a heady topic.
And I'm just going to go
back and have you speculate.
I mean, having
spent time in Asia,
having spent time in the Middle
East and India, and America,
for example, whatever it is
that John Williams is appealing
to in his music to the Western
emotional structure, what
is happening more in the
Eastern emotional structure
with the music there?
Totally different instruments,
different intervals.
>>MALKIN: Well--
>>REGINA: I can't-- I don't
know-- I don't-- you--
>>MALKIN: Yeah.
>>REGINA: I don't even
have the language,
except that I know I
feel very differently
and it's not-- I don't
feel as coherent.
>>MALKIN: Or--
>>REGINA: Personally.
>>MALKIN: But here's
the beautiful thing--
>>REGINA: Not that
that's a bad thing.
It might be pushing me.
>>MALKIN: I love-- I
love that you said that,
because this is the distinction
that I want to make.
I don't think the word
coherent is an accurate one
to describe what you're saying.
>>REGINA: OK, what is?
>>MALKIN: This is why I
said that sometimes exposing
yourself to things that
are not comfortable--
>>REGINA: Yeah, yeah.
>>MALKIN: --or
familiar, sometimes
are simply because they're
not the neuronal pathways,
for those of-- you know.
Do I need to explain that?
You know that.
>>REGINA: No.
>>MALKIN: Certainly not to you.
>>REGINA: You don't
need to explain.
>>MALKIN: Our neuronal pathways
are used to certain sounds.
And getting over
the unfamiliar--
>>REGINA: And certain cadences
and all of that, yeah.
>>MALKIN: --can be an uplifting
and expanding experience that
might not be about coherence.
It might be about unfamiliarity.
>>REGINA: Yeah--
>>MALKIN: Discomfort
with the unfamiliar.
>>REGINA: And I think we
all have this, where--
>>MALKIN: Of course.
>>REGINA: I listen to
mostly world music, right,
so I'm-- a cross blend of
music from around the planet,
but there are still certain
sounds that I just don't--
>>MALKIN: Right.
Well, I mean--
>>REGINA: They
don't do it for me.
They don't take me anywhere.
>>MALKIN: Arabic music
has like a half, like--
[SINGING] da-da-da-da-da-da.
It's a little less
than the minor third.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
Yeah.
>>MALKIN: And at first when
I heard it, it was like,
you know.
And in Indian music,
south India has many,
many different what
they call shruti's.
[SINGING] da-da-da.
>>REGINA: Mm-hm.
Right, right, right.
>>MALKIN: Sliding through.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>MALKIN: And I was
singing Indian music,
and I still do to some degree.
It's a great passion of mine.
So I love this topic,
and I think that it's
worth great-- more inquiry.
But I'll do one major
bold comment about it.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>MALKIN: The East
has been a place that
has preserved more of what we
would call monophonic music,
or where the note is more--
the music's more horizontal.
In other words, there's
a drone underneath--
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>MALKIN: --and
there's a melody--
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>MALKIN: --that weaves over the
tapestry of the drone, right?
>>REGINA: Uh-huh.
>>MALKIN: That's one note.
Ever since Palestrina
and Telemann and Bach,
that's polyphonic, and that
has sometimes-- has harmonies.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>MALKIN: Counterpoint.
>>MALKIN: Five melodies
happening at once in a fugue.
And that's a
fundamental difference.
And I actually think-- this is
why one of my newest project
is called "Divine 9
Tuning," "Divine 9 Music."
It's a new tuning system
that's come out of Amsterdam.
And my newest product is going
to be called "All is Well."
And the music
subtitle, I don't know,
but it's basically using a new
tuning system where every note
is divisible by nine, which is
the-- nine is the Pythagorean
number of stillness--
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>MALKIN: And the pi
ratio and all the things.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>MALKIN: And so every
note is divisible by nine,
which makes the experience
be-- can I say deeply, deeply
catalytic of a stillness state.
And so I created
a 46-minute track
that's designed for, you
know, sessions, massages,
and deep healing
sessions that-- where you
let that music just infuse you.
And if you want
more information,
go to divine9music.com.
>>REGINA: Divine 9, OK.
>>MALKIN: .com, yeah.
>>REGINA: All
right, divine9.com.
>>MALKIN: You're asking me
all my favorite questions.
>>REGINA: Well, I'm glad.
OK, I have just a couple
more before we wrap up.
And that has to do
with birthing someone
into the world and
that phase of music,
and then one that
you also work with,
which is music to
transition and help people
at end of life, which the boomer
generation who is now starting
to go through that process
isn't handling very well, being
the me generation.
>>MALKIN: Right.
Well you know, the
health care system
has done an extraordinary
job in dealing
with every other passage
except the end of life.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>MALKIN: And
frankly-- I don't want
to be harsh, although there's
a lot of things that are coming
out with especially Atul
Gawande's book called "Being
Mortal," there is a lot
of new information coming
that really says
that we're still
in quite a barbaric
time around facing
eldering and end of life.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>MALKIN: And how we
dispose of the elders
as trash, in a certain way,
and put them in nursing homes
and, you know, drug
them and all this.
This is my greatest passion
and my greatest commitment.
If I had a year to live, all I'd
do is focus on the end of life,
because its effect on everyone
in the culture is not just
for those who are
going through it,
but for all of us who are
watching and supporting
and loving the people we
love the most going through
unbelievable endless
interventions that undermine
the quality of life as they're--
what really needs to happen is
we need to acknowledge that
there's something called sacred
that isn't defined by a
religion but is defined
by an inclusivity that includes
religion but doesn't define it.
And music and the arts are the
perfect non-dogmatic catalyst
that doesn't bring an argument
about what faith are you
before you go and what, you
know, bring in last rites.
Let's make it sacred on
a universal level that
allows the beauty of
music to remind us
that we're hardwired to be able
to say, I love you, thank you,
I'm sorry, I forgive
you, goodbye,
in the famous words of the
five things that-- Ira Byock,
the famous doctor who-- so
we're hardwired to do that.
And what do we do
when we are actually
about to lose somebody?
Put them wires in,
do this intervention,
do this surgery no matter what
it's going to do to their life.
And it's an atrocity.
And we need to understand-- I'm
not saying that we don't need
to do something about it when
it's trying to save a life
if it's realistic, but--
>>REGINA: No, but what
you're speaking about
is almost gratuitous, and it
is barbaric in its own way,
what it puts that
person through.
>>MALKIN: We're so hungry
to hold onto somebody,
but we don't know
that we're hardwired
to die the way we're
hardwired to be born.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>MALKIN: And so
when we're born,
the other thing that
is now troublesome
is the bonding process.
And the bonding-- new
studies have shown out
of Germany that are
mind-blowing-- what's his name?
Anyway, I forget his name.
Schroth?
He discovered a way of bonding
with the baby in the womb
through different practices in
music that actually has created
results so that the babies
sleep through the night,
they're less
collicky, and they're
more in this state
of all is well--
>>REGINA: Makes perfect sense.
>>MALKIN: --rather than the
shock into the world, right?
>>REGINA: So are you
doing all is well movie--
music now for both the--
>>MALKIN: For the
beginning and end, yes.
>>REGINA: Beginning
and end of life?
>>MALKIN: Yes.
>>REGINA: Wonderful.
Resonant Sounds,
or lisarafel.com.
We're doing actually a musical
called "Can You Hear Me Baby,"
which is songs and stories
about love, sex and OMG birth.
>>REGINA: Oh, wonderful.
>>MALKIN: And it's all
about basically like "Vagina
Monologues" on
pregnancy and birth--
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>MALKIN: And around the
choices that we can make.
Because again, the
doorways-- beginning
of life, end of life-- have
ramifications and ripples
that affect every part.
If we don't bond properly,
then that has ramifications
on the child's ability to
regulate and self-regulate
and deal with issues
of resilience--
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>MALKIN: And a sense
of feeling like all
is well and like
you're not looking
through the world as an
enemy, but as a collaborator.
So music strategically
designed to do
that is something
that I've developed
with the "safe in
the Arms of Love--"
>>REGINA: All is well.
>>MALKIN: And all is
well at the end of life--
that experience of
dropping into trust,
as a child of a Jewish family
that has defined I suffer,
therefore I am--
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>MALKIN: --has been a
major issue in my life.
And I think, as
a wounded healer,
I've been looking
for ways to use music
that can be practical tools to
help us trust that, even when
we lose, even when things--
horrible things happen,
that there's a-- kind of
looking at it from, like,
if the angels looked at it,
if you believed in them.
Or looking at it from
a larger perspective,
we're not in control
of this, you know?
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>MALKIN: There's
something much larger
holding us all, whether
you believe in God or not.
There's something much larger.
And I think the
power of music is
it can wake us up
to that connection
to something much
larger than ourselves.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>MALKIN: And that's
my goal in this life.
>>REGINA: I couldn't agree more.
You are here to help
relieve suffering
and to offer upliftment
through that frequency.
>>MALKIN: That's it.
>>REGINA: I appreciate that.
>>MALKIN: And the doorways
are one of the biggest
places we can do it.
>>REGINA: Yes.
Thank you, Gary.
To connect with
Gary's work, you can
search under GarySMalkin.com,
or "Wisdom of the World."
Until next time, thank
you for joining us here
on "Open Minds."
[THEME MUSIC]